---
layout: post
title:  "Why I Vote (and you should too)"
author: "Mx Hyde"
date:   2025-02-21
---
Many people do not vote because they believe prominent politicians will not champion the kinds of radical change we desire of them.  Our societal systems _do_ need to change radically, and voting, for example for Democrats, will not bring about those needed radical and systemic changes; however, not voting is also equally as ineffective as voting in that regard.  Even if only 20M people vote in the next presidential election (down from ~150M in recent presidential elections), which would undoubtedly be the greatest drop in voter turnout ever, I don’t think that would take away any of the legitimacy of the election, at least not in any way that really matters.  In almost every major race, either a Democrat or a Republican will still be sworn in and receive the keys to power.  I believe that governments fall/change when the vast majority of people actively reject the right of that particular government to rule.  And low-to-no voter turnout is a result of that rejection, not the cause of it.  As long as most Americans believe in the institutions of government, they will accept the authority of the winner even if voter turnout is absurdly low.  The types of actions required to bring about radical, systemic change do not happen at the ballot box.  But nothing about voting precludes you from engaging in those revolutionary actions.  In the meantime, the current system of government still exists and still has real, meaningful impacts on every single person (certainly in this country, but arguably even the whole world).  It is worth engaging in harm reduction within the system even while simultaneously working to radically change it from without.
